John 1:1-18,29-43 (NIRV Bible)

The Word Became a Human Being
1 In the beginning, the Word was already there. The Word was with God, and the Word was God.
2 He was with God in the beginning.
3 All things were made through him. Nothing that has been made was made without him.
4 Life was in him, and that life was the light for all people.
5 The light shines in the darkness. But the darkness has not overcome the light.

6 There was a man sent from God. His name was John.
7 He came to be a witness about that light. He was a witness so that all people might believe.
8 John himself was not the light. He came only as a witness to the light.

9 The true light that gives light to everyone was coming into the world.
10 The Word was in the world. And the world was made through him. But the world did not recognize him.
11 He came to what was his own. But his own people did not accept him.
12 Some people did accept him and did believe in his name. He gave them the right to become children of God.
13 To be a child of God has nothing to do with human parents. Children of God are not born because of human choice or because a husband wants them to be born. They are born because of what God does.

14 The Word became a human being. He made his home with us. We have seen his glory. It is the glory of the One and Only, who came from the Father. And the Word was full of grace and truth.

15 John was a witness about the Word. John cried out and said, “This was the one I was talking about. I said, ‘He who comes after me is more important than I am. He is more important because he existed before I was born.’ ”
16 God is full of grace. From him we have all received grace in place of the grace already given.
17 In the past, God gave us grace through the law of Moses. Now, grace and truth come to us through Jesus Christ.
18 No one has ever seen God. But the One and Only is God and is at the Father’s side. The one at the Father’s side has shown us what God is like.

What John Says About Jesus
29 The next day John saw Jesus coming toward him. John said, “Look! The Lamb of God! He takes away the sin of the world!
30 This is the one I was talking about. I said, ‘A man who comes after me is more important than I am. That’s because he existed before I was born.’
31 I did not know him. But God wants to make it clear to Israel who this person is. That’s the reason I came baptizing with water.”

32 Then John told them, “I saw the Holy Spirit come down from heaven like a dove. The Spirit remained on Jesus.
33 I myself did not know him. But the one who sent me to baptize with water told me, ‘You will see the Spirit come down and remain on someone. He is the one who will baptize with the Holy Spirit.’
34 I have seen it happen. I am a witness that this is God’s Chosen One.”

John’s Disciples Follow Jesus
35 The next day John was there again with two of his disciples.
36 He saw Jesus walking by. John said, “Look! The Lamb of God!”

37 The two disciples heard him say this. So they followed Jesus.
38 Then Jesus turned around and saw them following. He asked, “What do you want?”

They said, “Rabbi, where are you staying?” Rabbi means Teacher.

39 “Come,” he replied. “You will see.”

So they went and saw where he was staying. They spent the rest of the day with him. It was about four o’clock in the afternoon.

40 Andrew was Simon Peter’s brother. Andrew was one of the two disciples who heard what John had said. He had also followed Jesus.
41 The first thing Andrew did was to find his brother Simon. He told him, “We have found the Messiah.” Messiah means Christ.
42 And he brought Simon to Jesus.

Jesus looked at him and said, “You are Simon, son of John. You will be called Cephas.” Cephas means Peter, or Rock.

Jesus Chooses Philip and Nathanael
43 The next day Jesus decided to leave for Galilee. He found Philip and said to him, “Follow me.”
