1 Corinthians 15:3-6 (NIRV Bible)

3 What I received I passed on to you. And it is the most important of all. Here is what it is. Christ died for our sins, just as Scripture said he would.
4 He was buried. He was raised from the dead on the third day, just as Scripture said he would be.
5 He appeared to Peter. Then he appeared to the 12 apostles.
6 After that, he appeared to more than 500 brothers and sisters at the same time. Most of them are still living. But some have died.

––

John 19:16-20:10 (NIRV Bible)

16 Finally, Pilate handed Jesus over to them to be nailed to a cross.

Jesus Is Nailed to a Cross
So the soldiers took charge of Jesus.
17 He had to carry his own cross. He went out to a place called the Skull. In the Aramaic language it was called Golgotha.
18 There they nailed Jesus to the cross. Two other men were crucified with him. One was on each side of him. Jesus was in the middle.

19 Pilate had a notice prepared. It was fastened to the cross. It read,

jesus of nazareth, the king of the jews.
20 Many of the Jews read the sign. That’s because the place where Jesus was crucified was near the city. And the sign was written in the Aramaic, Latin and Greek languages.
21 The chief priests of the Jews argued with Pilate. They said, “Do not write ‘The King of the Jews.’ Write that this man claimed to be king of the Jews.”

22 Pilate answered, “I have written what I have written.”

23 When the soldiers crucified Jesus, they took his clothes. They divided them into four parts. Each soldier got one part. All that was left was Jesus’ long, inner robe. It did not have any seams. It was made out of one piece of cloth from top to bottom.

24 “Let’s not tear it,” they said to one another. “Let’s cast lots to see who will get it.”

This happened so that Scripture would come true. It says,

“They divided up my clothes among them.
    They cast lots for what I was wearing.” (Psalm 22:18)
So that is what the soldiers did.

25 Jesus’ mother stood near his cross. So did his mother’s sister, Mary the wife of Clopas, and Mary Magdalene.
26 Jesus saw his mother there. He also saw the disciple he loved standing nearby. Jesus said to his mother, “Dear woman, here is your son.”
27 He said to the disciple, “Here is your mother.” From that time on, the disciple took her into his home.

Jesus Dies
28 Later, Jesus knew that everything had now been finished. He also knew that what Scripture said must come true. So he said, “I am thirsty.”
29 A jar of wine vinegar was there. So they soaked a sponge in it. They put the sponge on the stem of a hyssop plant. Then they lifted it up to Jesus’ lips.
30 After Jesus drank he said, “It is finished.” Then he bowed his head and died.

31 It was Preparation Day. The next day would be a special Sabbath day. The Jewish leaders did not want the bodies left on the crosses during the Sabbath day. So they asked Pilate to have the legs broken and the bodies taken down.
32 The soldiers came and broke the legs of the first man who had been crucified with Jesus. Then they broke the legs of the other man.
33 But when they came to Jesus, they saw that he was already dead. So they did not break his legs.
34 Instead, one of the soldiers stuck his spear into Jesus’ side. Right away, blood and water flowed out.
35 The man who saw it has been a witness about it. And what he has said is true. He knows that he tells the truth. He is a witness so that you also may believe.
36 These things happened in order that Scripture would come true. It says, “Not one of his bones will be broken.” (Exodus 12:46; Numbers 9:12; Psalm 34:20)
37 Scripture also says, “They will look to the one they have pierced.” (Zechariah 12:10)

Jesus Is Buried
38 Later Joseph asked Pilate for Jesus’ body. Joseph was from the town of Arimathea. He was a follower of Jesus. But he followed Jesus secretly because he was afraid of the Jewish leaders. After Pilate gave him permission, Joseph came and took the body away.
39 Nicodemus went with Joseph. He was the man who had earlier visited Jesus at night. Nicodemus brought some mixed spices that weighed about 75 pounds.
40 The two men took Jesus’ body. They wrapped it in strips of linen cloth, along with the spices. That was the way the Jews buried people.
41 At the place where Jesus was crucified, there was a garden. A new tomb was there. No one had ever been put in it before.
42 That day was the Jewish Preparation Day, and the tomb was nearby. So they placed Jesus there.

The Tomb Is Empty
20 Early on the first day of the week, Mary Magdalene went to the tomb. It was still dark. She saw that the stone had been moved away from the entrance.
2 So she ran to Simon Peter and another disciple, the one Jesus loved. She said, “They have taken the Lord out of the tomb! We don’t know where they have put him!”

3 So Peter and the other disciple started out for the tomb.
4 Both of them were running. The other disciple ran faster than Peter. He reached the tomb first.
5 He bent over and looked in at the strips of linen lying there. But he did not go in.
6 Then Simon Peter came along behind him. He went straight into the tomb. He saw the strips of linen lying there.
7 He also saw the funeral cloth that had been wrapped around Jesus’ head. The cloth was still lying in its place. It was separate from the linen.
8 The disciple who had reached the tomb first also went inside. He saw and believed.
9 They still did not understand from Scripture that Jesus had to rise from the dead.
10 Then the disciples went back to where they were staying.
