Luke 15:11-24 (NIRV Bible)

The Story of the Lost Son
11 Jesus continued, “There was a man who had two sons.
12 The younger son spoke to his father. He said, ‘Father, give me my share of the family property.’ So the father divided his property between his two sons.

13 “Not long after that, the younger son packed up all he had. Then he left for a country far away. There he wasted his money on wild living.
14 He spent everything he had. Then the whole country ran low on food. So the son didn’t have what he needed.
15 He went to work for someone who lived in that country. That person sent the son to the fields to feed the pigs.
16 The son wanted to fill his stomach with the food the pigs were eating. But no one gave him anything.

17 “Then he began to think clearly again. He said, ‘How many of my father’s hired servants have more than enough food! But here I am dying from hunger!
18 I will get up and go back to my father. I will say to him, “Father, I have sinned against heaven. And I have sinned against you.
19 I am no longer fit to be called your son. Make me like one of your hired servants.” ’
20 So he got up and went to his father.

“While the son was still a long way off, his father saw him. He was filled with tender love for his son. He ran to him. He threw his arms around him and kissed him.

21 “The son said to him, ‘Father, I have sinned against heaven and against you. I am no longer fit to be called your son.’

22 “But the father said to his servants, ‘Quick! Bring the best robe and put it on him. Put a ring on his finger and sandals on his feet.
23 Bring the fattest calf and kill it. Let’s have a feast and celebrate.
24 This son of mine was dead. And now he is alive again. He was lost. And now he is found.’ So they began to celebrate.

1 John 5:11-13 New International Reader's Version (NIRV)

11 Here is what God says about the Son. God has given us eternal life. And this life is found in his Son.
12 Whoever belongs to the Son has life. Whoever doesn’t belong to the Son of God doesn’t have life.
13 I’m writing these things to you who believe in the name of the Son of God. I’m writing so you will know that you have eternal life.
