Ephesians 5:15-33 (NIRV Bible)

15 So be very careful how you live. Do not live like people who aren’t wise. Live like people who are wise.
16 Make the most of every opportunity. The days are evil.
17 So don’t be foolish. Instead, understand what the Lord wants.
18 Don’t fill yourself up with wine. Getting drunk will lead to wild living. Instead, be filled with the Holy Spirit.
19 Speak to one another with psalms, hymns and songs from the Spirit. Sing and make music from your heart to the Lord.
20 Always give thanks to God the Father for everything. Give thanks to him in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Teachings for Christian Families
21 Follow the lead of one another because of your respect for Christ.

22 Wives, follow the lead of your own husbands as you follow the Lord. 23 The husband is the head of the wife, just as Christ is the head of the church. The church is Christ’s body. He is its Savior. 24 The church follows the lead of Christ. In the same way, wives should follow the lead of their husbands in everything.

25 Husbands, love your wives. Love them just as Christ loved the church. He gave himself up for her.
26 He did it to make her holy. He made her clean by washing her with water and the word.
27 He did it to bring her to himself as a brightly shining church. He wants a church that has no stain or wrinkle or any other flaw. He wants a church that is holy and without blame.
28 In the same way, husbands should love their wives. They should love them as they love their own bodies. Any man who loves his wife loves himself.
29 After all, no one ever hated their own body. Instead, they feed and care for their body. And this is what Christ does for the church.
30 We are parts of his body.
31 Scripture says, “That’s why a man will leave his father and mother and be joined to his wife. The two will become one.” (Genesis 2:24)
32 That is a deep mystery. But I’m talking about Christ and the church.
33 A husband also must love his wife. He must love her just as he loves himself. And a wife must respect her husband.
