1 Corinthians 6:12-7:5 (NIRV Bible)

Sexual Sins
12 Some of you say, “I have the right to do anything.” But not everything is helpful. Again some of you say, “I have the right to do anything.” But I will not be controlled by anything.
13 Some of you say, “Food is for the stomach, and the stomach is for food. And God will destroy both of them.” But the body is not meant for sexual sins. The body is meant for the Lord. And the Lord is meant for the body.
14 By his power God raised the Lord from the dead. He will also raise us up.
15 Don’t you know that your bodies belong to the body of Christ? Should I take what belongs to Christ and join it to a prostitute? Never!
16 When you join yourself to a prostitute, you become one with her in body. Don’t you know this? Scripture says, “The two will become one.” (Genesis 2:24)
17 But whoever is joined to the Lord becomes one with him in spirit.

18 Keep far away from sexual sins. All the other sins a person commits are outside the body. But sexual sins are sins against their own body.
19 Don’t you know that your bodies are temples of the Holy Spirit? The Spirit is in you, and you have received the Spirit from God. You do not belong to yourselves.
20 Christ has paid the price for you. So use your bodies in a way that honors God.

Advice for Those Who Are Married
7 Now I want to deal with the things you wrote me about. Some of you say, “It is good for a man not to sleep with a woman.”
2 But since sexual sin is happening, each man should sleep with his own wife. And each woman should sleep with her own husband.
3 A husband should satisfy his wife’s needs. And a wife should satisfy her husband’s needs.
4 The wife’s body does not belong only to her. It also belongs to her husband. In the same way, the husband’s body does not belong only to him. It also belongs to his wife.
5 You shouldn’t stop giving yourselves to each other. You might possibly do this when you both agree to it. And you should only agree to it to give yourselves time to pray. Then you should come together again. In that way, Satan will not tempt you when you can’t control yourselves.

––

1 Thessalonians 4:1-8 New International Reader's Version (NIRV)

Living in a Way That Pleases God
4 Now I want to talk about some other matters, brothers and sisters. We taught you how to live in a way that pleases God. In fact, that is how you are living. In the name of the Lord Jesus we ask and beg you to do it more and more.
2 You know the directions we gave you. They were given by the authority of the Lord Jesus.

3 God wants you to be made holy. He wants you to stay away from sexual sins.
4 He wants all of you to learn to control your own bodies. You must live in a way that is holy. You must live with honor.
5 Don’t desire to commit sexual sins like people who don’t know God.
6 None of you should sin against your brother or sister by doing that. You should not take advantage of your brother or sister. The Lord will punish everyone who commits these kinds of sins. We have already told you and warned you about this.
7 That’s because God chose us to live pure lives. He wants us to be holy.
8 Suppose someone refuses to accept our teaching. They are not turning their back on us. They are turning their back on God. This same God gives you his Holy Spirit.
